---
published: false
---
We’ve all heard of sustainability. Our definitions may vary from person-to-person, but we all have a similar notion. A naval intelligence specialist defines sustainability in terms of green energy and matching your rate of consumption to the rate of production; an environmental chemist relates it to protecting our natural resources and making conscious (if somewhat anxiety-based) decisions; my father considers it a minimization of effective waste. The particulars of these definitions vary, but in each case it’s clear we all have some set of shared values relating to what sustainability is. As such, I won’t worry too much about a rigorous definition of sustainable values, and instead use the term to refer to these common ideals we seem to manifest more or less on our own.
In my background research, I found that we all seem to make some effort to live sustainable lives, as evidenced by Oregon being consistently ranked within the top 5 most sustainable states in the US. Additionally, everyone I interviewed in preparation for this essay had some examples to give regarding practices they make towards sustainability in their personal life: choosing sustainable products, recycling where possible, or even opting to purchased digital goods over physical ones wherever possible. However, another trend I noticed in my interviews was that this same concern for sustainability was not widely practiced in the workplace. A naval intelligence specialist expressed his concern that the U.S. navy alone consumes more diesel than the next 13 nations military and non-military output combined. A local computer scientist noted that in his workplace “it’s hard to characterize any special sustainability efforts”. Most shockingly, the environmental chemist I interviewed mentioned a few times how “incredibly bad sustainability-wise (sic)” environmental chemistry can be, with harsh chemicals with few safe disposal methods, disruptive sampling techniques, and output-focused mindsets being used frequently. Therefore, I hope you’ll grant me the liberty of extending the concept of a sustainable household sought from this assignment to include a sustainable workplace. 
With these workplace sustainability concerns in mind, I’m prepared to summarize my manifestation of our shared values of sustainability as follows: A sustainable household is one which tries to be educated and considerate of sustainable values in their consumption, and whose constituents make efforts to incorporate their values of sustainability into their work. In keeping with this, and trying to think of projects to propose, I investigated how sustainability is handled by leaders in my industry (computer science and information technology). Unfortunately, most of what I came across, be it in a pamphlet issued by Cornell or in the description of an award granted to an industry leader in sustainability, primarily only discussed energy consumption and fixed resource decisions, such as working in an eco-friendly headquarters. As such, I started thinking instead about local culture in the CS/IT workplace, and what could be made more sustainable. Some things came to mind: we drink a lot of coffee; we tend to replace our gadgets more frequently than the average individual; we tend to opt for food that comes in disposable packaging; in Portland, we tend to walk and use transit rather than driving a car, even going so far as to have competitions for who bikes the most instead of driving.
	In particular, coffee is such a cornerstone of geek and CS/IT culture that I decided I should focus a project on coffee. Indeed, since only 20% of the coffee fruit ends up making it into usable roasted beans, it seems we should get the most out of that 20%. As such, I began thinking as Cradle to Cradle inspired me to do: use the abundant resource of spent coffee grounds in the virtual ecosystem of the IT workplace to solve a problem of that workplace. One stereotype of us geeks is that we tend to not be the most attractive people. Speaking from personal experience, this is not without truth. Therefore, for one of my projects, I’ll be making an exfoliating beauty scrub from (sanitized) spent coffee grounds. This scrub allows IT professionals to make their workplaces more sustainable, as well as creating a secondary  product from their work that benefits them as an individual rather than just the company they work for.
	Thinking further about this project, I realized not everyone would be thrilled with receiving a body scrub as a bonus for their hard work and caffeine consumption. For the stereotypical “macho man”, the most obvious individual to be less-than-thrilled by my previous product, I propose the following project: I’ll make fire starters suitable for starting a barbecue! Because coffee grounds are almost pure carbon, they are effectively reducible to charcoal with a bit of work. While there are high-tech solutions such as bio-compression and hydrothermal carbonization that yield more effective fuels from the same coffee grounds, such techniques usually require an advanced apparatus that is beyond the scope of this class to produce. Small firestarters are something most people know how to use, and can be created without a $300 or more expensive reactor. 
	For my final proposal, veering away from coffee and more towards general commuting in the Portland area, Laurence and I considered the extra kinetic energy usually wasted (or even made harmful in the form of shock) while walking. Because so many people walk relatively long distances around here, that energy accumulates quickly into a non-negligible amount being wasted. As such, we are proposing a pairwise project to make power generating shoes which at a minimum can function as safety shoes, generating their own power to light the outside of the shoe. Ideally, this will be extended with a battery to generate more widely usable electricity.
	 
## References
INTERVIEWS:
 - Jeffrey Bell, M.S.; Father; Head of Engineering at Galois, Inc
 - IS3 Kai Freeman; Friend; Naval Intelligence Specialist 3rd Class
 - Julie Layshock, Ph.D.; Co-worker’s wife, Professor of Environmental Chemistry and former board member at Zero Waste Humboldt
 
BOOKS:
 - Cradle to Cradle; Michael Braungart; 2002
 - Hydrothermal Carbonization of Lignocellulosic Biomass; Mohammad Toufiqur Reza; 2011
 - LEED v4 Practices, Certification, and Accreditation Handbook; Sam Kubba; 2016
 
OTHER:
 - “Sustainable Computing”; Pamphlet; Cornell University; http://archive.is/OjkqE
 - “Puppet Labs is Sustainability…”; Blog Post; Nandini Mitra from Puppet Labs; http://archive.is/qsAYk
 - “2017’s Greenest States”; Blog Post; John S Kiernan from WalletHub; http://archive.is/enRHZ
 - “Love to Ride Oregon: Home”; Website; Love to Ride Oregon; https://www.lovetoride.net/oregon
 - “Crop to Cup. I grew coffee and drank it…”; Reddit Post; matholio; https://www.reddit.com/r/dataisbeautiful/comments/7ez9lh/oc_crop_to_cup_i_grew_coffee_and_drank_it_made/
 - “Fire starter from used coffee grounds”; Instructables post; josefski; http://www.instructables.com/id/Fire-Starter-From-Used-Coffee-Grounds/
